[Music]
The estuary the world came to call San Francisco Bay is actually three bays
and a vast inland river delta.
San Francisco Bay proper is the most well known,
with its ever spectacular dance of air,
wind and water.
To the north lies San Pablo Bay,
nearly round in shape and exceedingly shallow.
East through a second break in the coastal mountain ranges called Carquinez Strait,
is a third bay,
Suisun Bay. Beyond a network of rivers and channels.
The highly altered river delta,
formed by the Sacramento and San Joaquin rivers,
provides the bay with its freshwater inflow. In the
long history of the planet. Today,
San Francisco Bay is a relative newcomer.
We know that there have been at least four bays, at least four times
when this valley was filled with water,
and there was a San Francisco Bay,
and there may have been as many as seven.
Twenty-seven miles West of the Golden
Gate lie the Farallon Islands.
Fourteen thousand years ago,
The Farallons were hills within a vast river plain extending west to the Continental Shelf
a few miles beyond. This once was the West Coast of North America.
During the height of the last Ice Age,
we tend to think the world was frozen over. Wooly Mammoths running around in snowy
areas and glaciers and all the peaks and actually the geological and
paleontological information tells us that the environment,
the climate here in San Francisco Bay region was not much different than it is
today. As the last Ice Age ended today's gulf
of the Farallones was a vast plain over which a great river flowed.
It was here that the first human inhabitants of the region likely lived.
Drawn by the abundant water,
fish and wildlife.
Some eight or nine thousand years ago,
as the glaciers of the Wisconsin Ice Age began to melt,
the seas rose and they came across the previous shore
line which is out there just on the other side of the Farallon Islands,
came across the plain we now call The Gulf of the Farallones,
began to enter San Francisco Bay,
through the Golden Gate. As sea level rose,
the great river that flowed out through a low point in the coastal range flooded.
the river canyon,
now called the Golden Gate began to take on its present form.
As water continued to rise vast river valleys inland filled as well.
Seven thousand years ago
the dramatic shift in sea level slowed. Sediment flowing in
from the surrounding hills in the great valley inland,
settled around the edges of the new estuary.
Plant and animal life begin to flourish.
The San Francisco Bay
We know today, was born.